[MUSIC]
So files have permission.
Files have owners first,
a file has an owner,
an owner is the person
who created the file.
The person being the user
who created the file, so
the username of the person
who created the file.
And files can also have permissions,
access permissions.
Now the permissions generally
come in three categories.
Read permission, write permission,
and execute permission.
Read permission,
means you can read the file,
write permission means you
can write data to the file.
Execute means you can run the file,
if it's a program you can run it.
So read, write, execute.
And the initials, the letters you use for
those are R, W, and X for
each one of those permissions.
Now, different permissions can
be assigned to different users
according to the type of user.
So there are three categories of
permission, three grouping of people, or
groupings of users, for every file
when you're talking about permissions.
So you can talk about permissions for
the user.
The user is a file,
is always referring to the file owner.
So the user permissions
are the permissions for the file owner.
Note that the user can be prevented.
The user might prevent himself from
writing to it for safety sake or
something like that.
So, you can have user permissions for
the owner.
You can have group permissions that
are permissions for a group of users.
So we haven't talked about this, but
you can define a group of users.
For instance, say I've got two users,
me and Joe,Ian and Joe.
I can make a group that's called my
group and it just contains Ian and Joe.
Then that group can have permissions for
access in this file.
So you can user permissions,
group permissions, and
then you can other permissions,
which is permissions for everybody else.
These permissions, we're not gonna talk
about how to change them right now.
Let's just talk about how to see them.
The way you view file permissions
generally is to type ls, get a,
ls is a directory, right?
ls -l, use the -l option,
it gives you the long form, and
you see all the data about each file.
So here I'm doing ls -l,
I got there's actually five files in here,
four of which are directory.
So desktop, indiecity,
python_games, and testdir,
those are all directories,
test1 is a file.
They color them differently but
they all have permissions.
So the permissions you can see
in the left-most column [COUGH].
So there's a d for the directory.
D designates directory and dash doesn't
but after that you see nine characters.
Nine characters in a row and
some of those characters are dashes.
So let's look at that first file,
desktop, for a second, right?
If you look in its permission fields
there's a d, telling me it's a directory,
but then there's rwx.
Then there's r-x, then there's r-x.
So, the r, w, and x stand for
read, write, and execute.
The first three characters
are the user permissions.
The next three characters
are the group permissions.
The next three characters are the other
permissions, for everybody else.
So for desktop, what that says is,
the user can read or write or
execute the file or the directory.
In this case, a directory, but then,
the group can only, if there were a group,
which there is not, but
if there were a group, it could read and
execute, could not write to the directory.
And the other, which is everybody else in
the world, can read from the directory,
and execute things in the directory,
but it cannot write to the directory.
There's a dash there, instead of a W,
there's a dash, so they indicate
they don't have write permission.
Now, if you look at that file,
test1, right?
Test 1 a few rows down, the user has
read permission and write permission but
no execute permission, which is fine
cuz it's not an executable program.
Then the group and the other have only
read permission, but no write permission.
So that's how you read the file
permissions and you can change those to,
we'll talk about those another time.
Now, [COUGH] in addition to
the user account that we're using,
we're using the pi account,
that's the default account.
There's another account
called the Root Account.
Linux machines all have a root account.
Root Account has the highest
permission level.
So the Root Account has access
permission for everything.
Key files and
directories are only accessible by root.
So, if you look at [COUGH]
a Linux operating system,
the operating system itself is
composed of many files, okay?
There are many files and executables and
things that make up the operating system.
And so some of these files and
directories,
some subset of these are tagged only for
root.
Only by root and only root has permission,
read and write access permission, or
at least write access.
This is for safety's sake because
if you start going around and
messing with some of these files you're
actually altering the operating system
itself, altering features
of the operating system.
If you don't know what you're doing
you can ruin the operating system.
So some of these files have
only root permission and
some of these directories
only root can access them.
Now, sometimes you need root permission.
You don't wanna have root
permission in general,
because it's a little bit dangerous,
it's not safe.
If you do something in root, it's done.
If I accidentally delete a file and
it's some critical file,
if you're not root it won't let you.
But if you're root, it will let you.
So root is dangerous
to be in all the time.
But, there are certain cases
where you need root permission,
say to install a program.
A lot of times installing programs you
need to be root, because installing
a program requires putting files in
all kinds of directories, and certain
directories are only accessible by root,
and maybe you need to modify a registry,
I'm talking Windows, you need to modify
some file that only root has access to.
So maybe installing
programs a lot of time,
you need to be rude,
not always, but sometimes.
Change in the operating systems, so
if you wanna modify the operating system,
update the operating system,
installs drivers into the operating
system, you often need to be root.
So there are a set of things
that you need to do with root.
The way you generally do that is you
use a command called Sudo, S-U-D-O.
SU is short for Switch User,
that's a command, switch user DO.
So you prefix your command with Sudo.
So, let's say I wanna do LS,
I wanna get a directory.
I type LS and that's fine, right?
But if I want to get it directly that
only root has permission to look at,
I wanna look at that directory.
I can't just type ls,
I have to type sudo ls, sudo ls and
it will do the ls command
as if I were root.
So it just applies root permission to
a single command which is a safer way
to do it.
You don't wanna generally become root
unless you really know what you're doing.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]